When you consider his closeness with the
congressman, the state senator, that one was
shaky from time to time. But nevertheless, when it
comes down to the nitty-gritty, they were usually
together, maybe after some arguments. But the
president, the congressman, the governor, the
state representatives, nearly always, I don't
think we'll ever see a pattern like that again. I
mean, it was like a maroon umbrella. And I
understand that Mr. Rudder and Jake Pickle,
Congressman Austin, their friendship went back
many years. Yeah, way back to Austin. And I think
Mrs. Rudder, actually had as much or more contact
with Jake because of social connections. I think
so. I think more than President Rutter did, but
they loved each other too. It's
nearly as if God had intervened. There was no
school. you remember how excited we were about the
first astronauts Teague was chairman of the house
national aeronautics and space committee and we
had who were those first ones John Glenn and
Shepard maybe yeah anytime their name really went
up in lights the next thing you know Teague had them
here and we were having our students were exposed
to that kind of greatness way before anybody else
ever dreamed of it and because it was because of the
team rudder really and we had werner von braun uh
that that was the most exciting thing to me in the
jobs i've had here both as an assistant to rudder
and williams and then and with com with
commencement ceremonies I could write a list of
people that I it's been my good fortune just to be
around a little bit just because of what those men
amounted to their reputations. One of the things I
wish we had done started way way way back there
would have been to have had all of the commencement
speakers sign a program and put that in a file of
some sort it would make a good display because it
really would have let's see Connolly on
commencement speakers just there have been three
that I know of that I can remember that were so good
in their own style that they were invited twice
John Connolly was one
Abner McCall was one. President of Baylor.
Baylor. And was it the writer from Houston that Dr.
Williams loved so much? Yes. He was here twice.
Yes. I can't think of his name, but he was so clever
and so good. Yes. And he was a UT graduate, but He
could tell an Aggie story and then it would turn
around and it would be a tea sipper story. He was
that good. Back to that period of change, I have
heard an anecdote that Senator Moore and
President Rutter on certain evenings ten o'clock
or so would accidentally encounter each other in
their cars in the parking lot of the campus theater
and they would talk politics there without anyone
else knowing about it have you ever heard that
story no have not I don't know whether it was true or
not but the supposedly that because if
I'm not mistaken part of those big discussions
came when Senator Moore was running for
reelection and Marion Pugh was running against
him opposing those changes and so president
rudder could easily have been caught in the middle
of that during that campaign i'm not saying that
these things didn't happen i'm just saying that
you didn't that i either had forgotten it and and
time is a factor now There are so many things that
just barely come back to me now because it has been a
long time. Well yeah we're almost at 40 years. Yes.
Let's go back to the start. Did Mr. Rudder give you
any in any manner any guidelines as to what your
responsibilities were and what the do's and
don'ts of being his assistant? uh there was never a
job description and it was the kind of job where you
served on a day-to-day basis once in a while
there'd be a project that would extend out over
time uh
An example would be he was greatly concerned when
the Corps was made non-compulsory, he was greatly
concerned about student life activities for
non-Corps students that would
stimulate the same spirit that participation in
the Corps would do. That's a very difficult
challenge. But that's the one thing that he asked
me to work on that was really a serious project. And
to make a long story short, when I left his office, I
became director of civilian student affairs. And
really his charge to me was find ways where we can
generate spirit among those students so they feel
strong about God and country and Texas A&M like the
core students do. And I did develop the outline for
the first residence hall program. And he
flinched. He didn't like anything that cost
money. He was tight. And he flinched when I gave him
my first report, and it called for, it seemed like,
oh, $65,000 to set up some residence halls on a
trial basis with resident advisors on every
floor. And that was way more than that. but he he
went along and said we'll try it and now uh a lot of
people don't know I was involved as much as I was in
that program but that was that was my that was my
answer to what he was shooting for uh your basic
question is I would go into his office or he would
come into mine every morning and there would be two
or three things on his mind that he wanted me to
check out for him find out how the wind is blowing on
this or that it might be a construction project
there was just no pattern to it he'd say well so and
so is saying this I hear see what you can find out so
it was kind of like being a fireman though there
were ongoing projects that extended over time
most of it was going in and finding out what was on
his mind that day and I had what I call I had two
manila folders one was a happy file and one was a mad
file And I could read him like a book after a while.
And I knew what to bring up and what not to bring up.
And if he was in a good mood, you could get nearly
anything through. If he was in a bad mood about
something, you just better keep your mouth shut if
there was any controversy involved with it. When
you began, describe the office staff. Who else was
there working in the president's office?
Geraldine Hott. was the
secretary. She was good. She'd been there for a
while. Nella Rowell came in. I
can't remember the sequence. But she came in. I was
the only assistant at first. That grew a little bit
later. As
I recall, we had no graduate assistants. I don't
think we had any student employees. Now, when I was
William's assistant, I did have an idea that we
should come up with a title of staff assistant not
assistant to and get people like
Roger Miller and Gary Morrow and Kent Caperton to
come in and work and see how these things work
because my strategy was that these boys are going
places and they're going to be high places And if
they have the insight that you can get only in this
office, aren't we going to be better served in the
years ahead? Well, one became a state senator, one
became a land commissioner, one became the state
controller. And, well, okay, that's on beyond
rudder, though. He wouldn't have gone for that
because that would have cost thousands of
dollars. So it was a Spartan staff. He had his
assistant.
I had a secretary. Who was your secretary? I had
Georgine Scafe, S-C-A-F-E, from Canada. who
could interpret letters from his friends in
France. That really pleased him. She was as good as
I've ever had. And then I got... Well, I won't go
into that one. I had one that was just absolutely
terrible. But Georgene Scaife was the one most of
the time, and she was just an absolute jewel.
Describe... It was very small stuff. Describe Ms.
Hott and Nelda Rowell. Describe them and their
duties. Ms. Hott did the routine and things like
making out his schedule and taking the first look
at the mail that came in and deciding where it
should go for his eyes only. And one of the things
that I did, two things that I did for him that were
pretty well developed as he tested me out, was that
nearly every piece of mail that came in, I would
draft his response. And I knew him well enough
after a period of time that I could pretty well
guess what he wanted to say and how he wanted to say
it. And if I didn't quite hit it, He would go ahead
and sign the letter. Come in. That's all right.
Yeah, we're back. Talking about the things that I
was doing. which relates back to an earlier
question I would routinely do his correspondence
which was considerable that would usually take at
least half a day and a lot of it was stuff that you had
to research you know finally well what is he saying
this for and then try to just figure out and I could
go to Geraldine Hott and say Jerry what do you think
how would how do you think he'd feel on this and she
could read him like a book she was very good and uh
The other thing that I did was write his speeches,
which was in
my estimation,
it probably gave him the ideas that he didn't have
time to research the little angles that I had time
to do. But I always dreaded to do a speech for him
because
if he read it and didn't have time to get it in his
mind and do at least part of it extemporaneously,
he was not good. And on the other hand, he was as good
as he could be off the cuff. so what I would always
hope for is that he would take time on the plane or
the car to read through it get it in his mind and then
do it his way and so I didn't like doing speeches for
him because very often he would read them and he was
very poor at that that's just as a young faculty
member at that time I and my colleagues thought
that he was not a good speech maker but that he was
good in what we called conversational speaking.
That's right. And we would sometimes shake our
heads and and snicker. Then, on the other hand, I
recall he is quite often indicating that he was
aware that speech making was not his best talent.
So you're you would hope that you would provide him
enough information in a speech outline that he
could put it into his own words. Did he have any pet
peeves or kind of things you realize about never,
never in a speech?
No, not really.
He pretty well trusted me that I was not going to put
together some things that just were nonsensical.
He was not big on, if he told jokes it would be
extemporaneous and he could do that well. But I
would never write jokes into a speech. He was
pretty serious minded. about how a speech should
be constructed. And that's kind of old school,
which he was, really. Prim and proper and the right
things, thanks to the right people. He was good at
complimenting people for work that they
contributed to a certain project. When Nelda came
along, Nelda, now Green, but then Rowell, she was
kind of a staff assistant that worked in
particular,
I would say,
those types of activities.
Let's say we were going to have a
host a party or something of that sort for a group of
people. Nelda would usually be the one that would
arrange for flowers and niceties and
food service and things like that and I remember
that both
Am I correct? I can't think of exactly what year she
came, but
she worked with the President's wives
incessantly. She and Mrs. Williams later would
spend months selecting the theme for a Christmas
card, the official Christmas card.
She dealt with the women's kinds of things, that
aspect of how a social event should go.
the arts and crafts of a president's office.
That's what I'm trying to say. Nelda always seemed
to me to be splendidly capable. Do you have any idea
who identified her? How did the president's
office find her? She was a fairly young faculty
wife at that time. Didn't she start working for
Bill Graff? And or Wayne Hall, right in that little
shop. I don't know. Yeah. Okay, so that was. So she
was in his view, like when we were in the Koch
building, his office, you know, the real nice
office over here, and Bill Graff and then Dr. Hall,
they were all right in that same little mix. And Mr.
Rudder noticed attractive people. and if you had a
smart one that was an attractive person too you had
a bird nest on the ground and she was that way always
pleasant always smiled and I think he just lifted
her from from that staff and I know she worked for
Bill Graff and I think Wayne Hall too but she was
right in there and she was right under he had to go
right by her to get in and out of the building even
Now, when you went to work for Mr. Rudder, the
president's office was in the Koch building.
System building. In the system building. Then we
moved to the Koch building. Then moved to the Koch
building. And, of course, that had to do with the
comings and goings of chancellors because the
same offices were used. The Koch building was
designed by Mr. Volker from New Braunfels, Texas.
And he spent his entire life as a former student
praying to design a building on the A&M campus, and
he did, and it was the worst designed building
that's ever been built with an old flat roof. The
rooms don't connect properly. Nothing is right
about that building. And one thing that was wrong
about it was on the west side where my little office
was, next to the drill field, caught the western
sun as it went down. And I said to Mr. Rutter one
time, back to his being real crisp about money, I
said, do you think it would be possible for me to get
some old cheap drapes to put in here to shield that
sun out of here? He said, Cooper, if we do that for
you, everybody on campus will want drapes. And he
said, we can't afford it. So I had a simple metal
Venetian blind, and you'd come in there, you'd
have to take your tie off, take your coat off, and it
was intolerable, the heating system, the holes.
Then he came in there one August afternoon, about
four o'clock, and it was about 82 degrees in there,
and he said, my God, Cooper, he said, how can you
work in this place? I said, well, that's why I
wanted those ACs. Be quiet and get the damn things.
He said, I don't want to come in here and find you
dead someday. What was a, for Mr. Rudder, describe
a typical work day in the office. What time did he
get there? He'd
get there early if there was something real
exciting underway. I remember I always feared
coming in after eight and find him there and me come
in after he did. That was a lifelong fear that I had.
Williams was easy because he would spend two hours
in his office at the house and he'd have all of his
dictations done and he'd just give the tapes to
whoever was out front when he came in and Rudder
usually had two feet of documents to sign when he
came in and very often he would come in way before
eight and get all of the reading and signatures out
of the way. Part of his hang-up was that
he wanted to see in particular everything that
dealt with money. And he would not sign a document
that had to do with a fiscal transaction without
Tom Cherry or Clark Daigle's initials right
there. If it wasn't there, he would not sign it. And
so, he didn't go lightly with that stuff. And when
he signed his signature to something, you can bet
your sweet life it's the way he wanted it or he
wouldn't sign it. Nothing just to get it out of the
way. He just wouldn't do that. and so he held people
highly accountable for uh for anything to do with
policy changes money money transactions and
things like that so he'd get in there early because
he knew that around nine o'clock his day would be
out of control and uh he couldn't say no to an old
buddy that happened by that worked with the land
commissioner that was from brady or you know he
just he couldn't do that So he would do the heavy
work early and I would go in usually around 9
o'clock nearly every morning and sit with him and
find out really what he wanted me to do that day or he
would have things that he wanted to bounce off of
me. I'm not saying that I was that influential at
all. He just When he wanted to get an average guy's
reaction to something, he would ask me those
questions. And it always made me feel good when
that door would open. He'd knock at a little hall
there at the system building, a little bitty
office. He'd knock and come in and sit on the desk
and say, you know, this has really been on my mind.
And it made me feel real good when he would take me
into his confidence because he was so busy that he
didn't have time to do that whole lot. There were
days that we would be right next to each other and
hardly ever see each other. Lunches, were those
usually working lunches or did he have a schedule
that included a lot of social activity at lunch? He
loved to host lunches and very, very few of his
lunches were at home.
he would have a lunch somewhere with someone and
usually nearly always talk business did i tell you
the story before about his daughter and the boy
that she was in love with he
was very strict with the girls they would they were
the president's daughters they would not wear
shorts even in the privacy of that house that was
not done and he kept Mrs. Rutter bless her heart on a
very strict budget and most of the time she didn't
have nearly all the help she needed when there was a
function at the house he just expected her to do it
he didn't want to spend money for that he'd buy the
booze and the refreshments is always good but she
had to she had to do most of it but Jane fell in love
with a nice-looking, big, old, tall boy that was
headed into veterinary medicine.
And
Mr. Rutter would not allow young men to come to the
house, but she told this boy that on Thursday that
nobody was going to be home but her, and she wanted
to fix his lunch. And they had worked this out. He
worked for buildings and grounds, and he worked as
a gardener, working his way through school. And
that day, he was working in the president's rose
garden. They hauled him in on a dump truck. You've
seen them.
The whistle blew, which Dr. Williams stopped
immediately when he got here, and the boy threw his
hoe down there in the president's yard and told the
old guy with a khaki shirt buttoned at the collar he
said y'all go on home for lunch he says I'm going to
eat here walked in the front door of the
president's home and the old man nearly had a heart
attack his supervisor with physical plant he said
I'm going to eat here and walked into the
president's house and the guy could just see his
job flying out the window. He had no idea about the
boy. I think it was Jane. That was the funniest
thing that I can recall about getting around the
old man. He
was in four years
under intense pressures.
I never saw him out of control of his temperament,
never. I could tell when he was really mad. You
could look at his eyes and he would turn ashy white
and his eyes took on a laser beam, but he never
raised his voice. Jack Williams did. I've seen him
lose his temper once at me that really made me feel
bad. What would be the causes of Mr. Rutter's
anger, frustration? Somebody doing something
that they knew was wrong and did it anyway, a policy
matter. He was very, very sensitive. about the
written word. And if a battalion story came out,
that would send him higher. And you know of his, the
DeFrank episode and all of that stuff. But he was
really sensitive about what people said,
especially in print. Not as much verbally, as when
somebody would write a story or be quoted as saying
something and the kids picked up on that the
students knew that and a lot of the misery that he
went through is because they were doing it for fun
and they took and one thing they did of course was
take it out on the Bulldog Ranger and they would
they had those little collar I mean little
blankets they'd strap on him and they'd put when
when Mr. Rutter was promoted from brigadier to
major general in the reserve you go from one star to
two and that day Ranger came out with two gold stars
on his on his blanket and then when he was having the
big row with DeFrank Ranger came by the office one
day and he had on a blanket that said, I'm talking
about a dog blanket, maroon. And the big letter
that says, I read bat editorials.
Now the students made the blankets. They had one,
evidently, that they just, whatever was on their
mind that day, they would do it. And I don't know who
was behind all that, but I imagine Tommy DeFrank
was part of it. But if there was a big issue, Ranger
would come out with some kind of an ornament or sign
on that would poke fun at him. One day I got a call
from Ann Rudder in tears on the phone. It was a
Sunday afternoon. And she says, Edwin, I think
Ranger's drowned. I said, come on. Dogs don't
drown. All dogs can swim. She said, well, he jumped
out of our boat. He went down, and he hadn't come
out. So wherever I was, I went out to Carter Creek.
And that dog had jumped out of that boat and went
down like a sack of concrete to the bottom and
drowned. and she says how are we going to find him I
said well let me see I found a fishing pole I said
where do you think it was and we were out in the boat
and I prodded around and finally I felt it I said
he's right here and I don't know whether I went down
or I guess I did.